So thank you.
Thank you for your time this afternoon.
Thank you for joining us
for this public hearing on the planning bill
and natural environment.
Bill. Uh, look, I'd also just like
to acknowledge the ministry for the environment, uh,
participants that we have, um,
on the Zoom this afternoon as well.
Um, and we also have the Parliamentary Commissioner
for the Environment's office as well.
So, um, look, we'd love to hand it over to you
for some opening remarks,
and then we'll open it up to members for questions.
So, over to you, minister.
Well, thank you. Um, you've had a,
I think you've had a good briefing from the, um,
team at M ffe, uh, already, uh,
on the legislative architecture of the two bills,
which are, uh, before you.
Uh, and so I don't have a huge amount more to add to that,
um, other than to say, uh, you know,
government regards these bills as critical
to long-term prosperity of New Zealand.
Um, and there's a widespread acknowledgement,
including I've heard from members of this committee that the
RMA has neither improved the environment
nor, um, allowed development within limits, um,
and is a major, um, constraint on housing
and business growth, um, utilization of natural resources,
um, infrastructure costs and consenting timeframes.
Uh, and, you know, we're determined to tackle that.
Um, these bills are a bit of a starting point.
Um, I don't pretend for a second that they are perfect.
Um, it's a huge amount of policy development has, uh,
gone onto them over the last, uh, two years, obviously,
as we've worked our way through, uh, the process.
Um, but I'm sure that, uh, you as a committee
and, uh, knowledge, there's, um, quality
of expertise on the committee, uh, across, across the,
the parliament across the house, um,
with members who've got interest in local government
environment, um, Tao Maori, uh,
freshwater obviously as well.
So, um, uh, you know, encourage you to apply, um,
your various backgrounds
and your interests, um, to the, uh, to the, to the,
to the, uh, the issues that will, that will arise.
Um, I think the submissions close
on the 20th, is that right?
Or 13th? 13th, that right? Yes.
I see Rachel's, Rachel's nodding from Dunedin.
Um, so obviously you,
you wanna, wanna take an interest in them.
I suspect like every other large scale reform,
everyone waits until literally the very
last moment to submit them.
Um, well, I suspect some have come through already.
Um, so I suspect that there's gonna be, there's gonna be,
you know, there'll be all the major stakeholders will,
will have a view on a variety of different things.
Um, so, um, you know, as you work your way through them,
I'll be interested to see what the committee comes up with.
Um, you've got plenty of time for the, uh, plenty of time
to, uh, get, get into the submissions and then the debates
and policy discussions that follow, uh, from that.
Um, so looking forward to that.
Um, I could run you through, you know, the goals,
the instruments, the, you know,
the way the decision making's gonna work,
but it's, I don't wanna reiterate what you've already, um,
kind of heard from officials, um, in relation to that.
It's probably not a lot of point in that.
Um, so maybe we can just go straight to questions, um, if
that, that works for everybody.
Yeah, no, thank you, minister.
Look, we have got questions, so we'll move
to Rachel Brooking first.
Thank you. And, uh, I know lots of us will have lots
of questions, but I'll just stick
to one topic to start with.
Uh, and that is acknowledging this point
that submissions are still open at the moment that a lot
of people have been asking me about Plan Change one 20 in
Auckland, and how that,
how you see these changes working with that plan change
and how long that plan change, uh, will stand
for if it then has to be redone under this new legislation.
So if you could give us some idea of what your vision is,
that would be useful.
Yeah, well, we're giving some thought to that.
Um, I mean, as you know, uh, PC one 20,
also known as PC 78, mark two, um,
you know, is a, essentially a holdover
or a hangover from the, uh, from the old regime.
Um, oh, oh, oh, yeah.
I mean, um,
e every other council has done a new plan change in response
to the N-P-S-U-D, uh,
initial policy statement on urban development.
Um, Christchurch has belatedly got their, um, last year
now in fairness to Auckland.
They've had some issues, um, with the floods
and, um, the Auckland Light Rail corridor,
and there's a variety of things going on there.
Um, so I am really keen to land PC one 20.
Uh, the reality is Auckland has not updated its unitary plan
in response to the M-P-S-U-D, uh,
and they need to, um, a new plan is required for Auckland.
Um, I've said publicly,
and I'll repeat here, that, uh, I think there's a,
there's an argument that once PC one 20 is landed,
uh, for Auckland
and we're underway on that now, it's an 18
to 20 month process, there's an argument
that should just let that be the plan for Auckland, um,
for a while rather than land it
and then go into another round of plan changes,
which I don't think anyone would be particularly keen on.
Um, we haven't taken a, I mean,
that's not reflected on the bills
that we are talking about today.
Um, just you asked the question,
so I'm just venturing a view.
Um, there's an argument for that.
So, we'll, we'll have a think about that.
And it may be that we need to make
some changes as a result of that. Um, so
Are you saying there, though, that you're interested in
people's submissions on that point in this process?
Because it goes to the transitional provisions here.
Well, have people made submissions around that?
Oh, I'm sure they will. And they'll, I
Suppose we see in due course.
Well, I mean, yeah, I mean, yeah, if it goes to the transit,
it's gotta be relevant to the bills,
but I suppose it goes to the transitional,
then you can have a look at that.
Um,
Yeah, well, it's usually important
to our biggest city. Um,
Yeah, yeah. My, my focus
at the moment is on working out
what the changes we are gonna make, um,
to the legal requirements for Plan Change one 20.
Um, but, you know, clearly there'll be a,
there'll be an intersection with
this down the line potentially.
So see what people say about that.
Okay. Thank you. But we'll move to LA Farm now.
Thanks Chair, and thanks for your time, minister.
Um, and just picking up on your opening comments, you know,
inviting all of us at select committee to really have some
very, um, thoughtful
and considered input into this bill,
I was just interested in your comments, um,
or I guess advice for the committee about,
at quite a high level, whether you would be open to
recommendations that would perhaps more better integrate the
two bills, or is that sort of like a bottom line,
that it is gonna be two bills no matter what,
or you are relying purely on that, uh,
national policy direction
or the national standards to really dictate how,
how integrated they are?
Do you have any comments for us on that?
Well, they're, I mean, they're relatively integrated
already, to be honest.
Um, I mean that they talk to each other.
There's a common, um, kind
of parlance across the, across the bills.
Um, so I'm, you know, I'm open to feedback around that.
Um, we, you know, we want, we, you know, the,
the design choice to have a planning bill
and a environment bill is, is a deliberate one.
Uh, and so I don't think that's gonna change.
Um, but, you know, clearly they have to talk to each other
'cause they ultimately all come together into,
come into plans or, or chapters of plans.
Um, so, you know, I'm open
to seeing people's feedback around that.
Um, yeah.
Thank, thank you. Uh, look, we'll move
to Cameron Luxton now.
Uh, thank you chair. Um, minister, my questions about our,
just how do you see competitive urban land markets working?
Um, what, what sort of, how is
that gonna play out, do you think?
Yeah, so, um, the concept of creating competition, uh,
within land use or land markets, um, is, uh,
is actually in concept
that New Zealand economists have developed.
Um, we are genuinely world leading in that sense.
Um, so we want to embed that at the heart of the, uh,
reforms, which is why they're in the goals.
It's in the goal, one of the goals.
Um, and the point is to, uh, create
competition in what, uh, use land is used for, um,
and not the artificial planning constraints.
Um, guide decisions around what land is used for,
particularly for housing, um,
and to, uh, make sure that economics
guides decisions rather than artificial fear by planners.
So how does that, uh, so it's gonna be important.
Sorry, say that again. Oh, so
The que Yeah. So just
on that then, how does it,
how do you see it working in practice?
Like, uh, well abundant development capacity
in our city so that people have a choice as to where
and how to develop rather than have
little planning rules decide that.
Thank you. Uh, we'll now move to Preya.
Thanks. Um, I've got, uh, sort of one main question
around bad and then a couple of, um, follow up questions
around that same topic.
And it's really about from memory.
Um, the Natural
and Built Environments Act had some mandatory environment,
uh, environmental limits for biodiversity
and, um, I think it was coastal ecosystems.
Um, my read of this bill, the Natural Environment Bill,
is that it seems the focus seems to have shifted
to no net loss of indigenous biodiversity.
Um, also it kind
of reads like it's more focused on considerations rather
than requirements, which means it's not mandatory limits,
but discretionary, I wanted your view on that, minister.
Well, the National Environment Bill requires limits,
environmental limits to be set for air, fresh water,
coastal water, land
and soils, uh, with national limits set
to protect human health informed
by Ministry of Health guidelines.
That's in the, um, in the NEBI forget the exact clause,
but it's, it's in there, um, with, uh,
management units, um, you know,
being the way in which those limits are set.
Um, so I, I don't know,
I think you're right in what you're saying.
Um, I, I think the concept of, um, I mean people,
you know, reasonable people can agree, disagree,
or agree about this, but, um, I hope we can all agree
that there is, you know, sort of by definition at one level,
uh, limits on resource usage.
And the debate is really about having a,
having development within those limits, um,
and making that as simple as possible.
Uh, on the biodiversity issue, we did go for no net loss.
Um, and, uh, again, that's one that, you know,
people can have a debate about.
Um, so I'm interested in the submissions on
that, seeing what people think.
Okay. Um, also
there was previously sort of whether the A MB ea, um,
sort of a required requirement
around cumulative environmental effects, uh, being,
uh, assessed against those limits.
Um, and I wanna know
what the safeguards within this ledge is around that
to prevent biodiversity loss specifically.
And my final question, I'll just chuck them both in there,
is around the monitoring framework.
So there was one previously from memory, um,
but I don't see one
unless I've read it wrong in the natural environment, bill.
So what would the monitoring, uh,
framework look like if there is, when,
Um, CU effects are covered off?
Um, there's someone there from MFE who wants
to talk briefly about that.
I've forgotten exactly what we've, um, done on that one.
Nadine there or someone there? That's Hayden there.
No, I can, uh, cover that off, minister. Oh, yes.
Um, yes, you, you are right.
Uh, cumulative effects,
particularly under the natural environment,
bill is covered off
and are addressed a lot of further detail on the specificity
of, uh, how that will be achievable come through
through the, the national policy direction, which is one
of the requirements under both pieces of, uh, legislation.
And you also, men mentioned the monitoring framework.
The legislation also includes quite extensive requirements
around monitoring of outcomes.
Um, and that will be back against the, the, the limits
and the other parts of the legislation as well.
Okay, thank you. Cabinet.
Um, I've forgotten that cabinet hasn't made a call
on the precise form of a monitoring entity.
Um, you know, there's been a bit of talk around
should there be a, you know,
should the EPA have regionalized offices so
that you take off the monitoring, um,
and enforcement off regional councils.
Um, obviously it's sort of tied up
to some extent across local government, uh, reform,
which is sort of under underway on a parallel,
but related track, obviously.
Um, so there's, there's a few decisions yet to come on that,
but, um, obviously monitoring
and enforcement is really important.
And in fact, one of the, you know, one of the things
that will come outta the reform to do that better.
Thank you. Uh, Julianne,
Your, my question is somewhat related
to the questions from LAN and Priyanka.
Um, um, I was just wondering to the extent that
you would envisage planning instruments being able
to be used to get better environmental outcomes, um,
for example, and I, I think it's just easier
to make it concrete with an example.
Um, planning rules could be used in a proactive way
to increase biodiversity
or to ensure that development's happening in a way
that's reducing stormwater impact on
wastewater, uh, systems.
And, um, from my initial questions,
it sounded like the rules around biodiversity, no net loss,
um, and other environmental mental limits would be like,
completely separate from considerations
of urban planning rules.
And it, it, it is possible to get more housing
and make sure that it's done in a way
that improves the environment,
takes the pressure off our increased flooding
and heavy rainwater events.
So I'm, I'm just interested in how that would work.
Does that have to come through national guidance?
Um, or would it be possible for councils to, um,
proactively do that themselves?
Um, well, the short answer is I don't, I don't know.
I mean, um, in the short, in the short term, um, uh,
I don't, I don't really understand your question.
I mean, um, I mean, there's nothing to stop people doing
that stuff, um, proactively off their own bat, obviously.
Um, you know, law is the law, but, you know, um,
I guess our planning are like, so if a council's,
you know, going out, notifying a plan
with the zones in place
and the rules in place, um, like
will there be able to be rules that
require low impact development,
green infrastructure for storm water?
Oh, right. Um, things, things
that have been used in other places
for very cost effective solutions that are better
for the water, better for the people,
and overall have a net environment, um, economic benefit.
Um, and I, it just seems like the way the laws written
separately that the planning act may not
take into account the ability to try
and improve the environment.
Well, I think that'll depend on national
policy direction, right?
Um, so that'll,
there's the short an the short answer is it, it depends.
And will central, I mean, is the government required
to provide national guidance in that space or not?
'cause I think setting environmental bottom lines is
somewhat different to enabling tools that mean
that councils can ensure
that the urban development is happening in a way that
enhances the environment. Well, the,
The government's required to set national policy direction
across, um, you know, the range of things in the bill.
So, so the short answer is yes,
but the question is not that, the question is more
what the national policy direction says.
Right? Um, so yeah, I mean, I think this kind of goes
to the, this kind of goes to the architecture of the,
of the legislation and the,
and the system we're trying to create, which, you know,
quite, quite deliberately tries to, um,
make much more coherent the national direction
that exists in the system right now.
I mean, everyone sort of thinks that the RMA is this kind
of like massively decentralized system,
whereas in reality, um, planning policy
and environmental policy is always about
getting the balance right between, um, national direction
for want of a better phrase, uh, and local local interests.
Um, and, you know, people who sort of say it should be one
or the other, you know, I think are frankly wrong.
Everyone actually, when you think about it,
believes in some, some balance.
Um, but the changes that we, that
included in these two bills are designed to get,
create a greater sense of coherence and, and,
and syn synthesis at the national level.
Um, particularly around planning,
because doing things, you know, different ways
around the country has driven up cost
and, um, you know, had all those time issues
that we've talked about previously
that I know you're very familiar with.
So, um, it's, it's backing that balance. Right.
Um, and you know, no doubt the officials have taken you
through the funnel concept at the heart of the bill as well.
So, um, the short answer is, I don't know.
Um, possibly
I, I'll just add one other point just to elaborate on
what you said, if that's helpful.
Um, just 'cause it, so with respect to both bills
and importantly the goals, the goals set, the intention
or the system outcome under both BES
and the expectation in the legislation is
that the national policy direction under both bills
will talk to each other.
So that is where you will get,
and when you, when councils are preparing their plans,
whether that be a spatial plan
or their regional combined plan, you will get those, uh,
issues coming together at the local level.
So the answer is yes,
that can be accommodated within that framework.
Thank you for that clarification.
Look, we're gonna loop background now too, Rachel, again,
Thank you. And I've
got a couple of wording questions that link
to the discussions you've just been having
and I think will be important for submitters.
And so one of them is still on this biodiversity topic,
and that is that the purpose
of the natural environment uses the word enhancement
of the natural environment.
But then when you go to the goals, there doesn't seem
to be anything about enhancement.
There's this no net biodiversity loss and safeguarding
and sort of words like that, that are not as ambitious
as enhancement.
So that's my first question, if you wanna comment on
that difference of language.
Uh, then going to, um, some of your conversation just now
with Julianne, again, the goal, there's a goal at, uh,
clause 11 one C
to create well functioning urban and rural areas.
And that seems to be the goal
that would do the heavy lifting in terms of
green infrastructure
and things that I think Julianne was just referring to.
Uh, and you can say, well then, you know,
where does the meat come on that comes on?
If the minister chooses to do some national direction, uh,
it'd be useful if you could comment on, on what you see
that goal, uh, what it would cover off.
So, so that was two questions.
Yeah, I mean,
I mean the, these are precisely why the bill
before the committee, right?
So just to, um, you know, get into some of the discussion.
Well, I can, I can ask it another way then.
On the first question about the enhancement,
do you want the environment to be enhanced?
Well, that's what the goal says.
I mean, that's what the word enhance means. I mean, oh,
That's not what the goal says.
That's what the purpose is.
Yes. But, um, the,
your goal thing was about biodiversity, right?
No net loss of biodiversity.
So you can enhance the environment while having
no net loss of biodiversity.
They're not necessarily in contra distinction.
I I can see why you're arguing.
They are, but they're not necessarily,
that's not necessarily true.
Um, so, you know, I mean, like, I mean, I'm sorry
to sound like Winston, but like words mean what they mean.
Well, uh, which is why I'm asking the question.
But your intention from what you are saying
and you want us to interrogate with submissions, is
that there should be improvement of the environment.
Well, that's what's on the purpose force.
Yeah. Okay. And then going to the planning act
or the planning bill and the well-functioning urban
and rural, what is your view on what that could,
um, encompass?
Well, I'm not, I'm not trying to be difficult
to dodge the question, but it, it just literally means
what it says, which is, I mean, you,
I don't have it in front of me, but it's create
well-functioning urban and rural environments.
If you don't have the word rural in
there, everyone will say, you've left.
You know, you're not, you're
forgetting about rural New Zealand.
If you don't have Urban New Zealand in there, you just have,
like rural, everyone will say, you know,
you've left out everyone else.
And if you just have every, everywhere, you know,
people will say you're not being specific enough.
So like, it, it literally means that,
I mean, there's a whole variety.
I mean, if you think about it, the goals set the scope
of national direction, right?
So if you think about, um,
what councils quite legitimately want
to do at a local level, um, in terms of rules around,
I mean like setback requirements, boundary to height,
to boundary requirements, all this sort of stuff that, um,
people get involved in.
I mean, that those, those rules are set.
That would be those, those would be things
that would appear in district plans or in,
or in the standardized zones as a result of the idea
of setting, uh, of creating well-functioning urban
and rural environments.
I mean, there's, likewise in the rural areas,
there's a whole bunch of different rules that happen in
rural areas that, you know, it's not worth going into.
But that's the hook, right?
For a whole bunch of things that are gonna appear in
district plans or district
chapters or whatever we call them.
But with your focus on private property rights, a lot of
that is property by property.
So what about the public spaces
and the need for public spaces
to enable a well-functioning urban environment?
So if you suddenly intensify an area
and you have a whole lot more people in an area,
then you're gonna need some more parks for people
to walk on, or you're gonna need some more trees
for cooling, or you're gonna need some more small such.
Does that all come through this one goal?
Or is it somewhere else?
Or is it actually,
nobody should be thinking about those things,
Although I would've thought that would fall within the
definition of a well functioning urban environment.
I mean, I don't, I'm not giving you legal advice.
I mean, like, firstly, the bills haven't been passed yet,
and some of these things are
gonna be tested through the court.
So, you know, I would've thought that sort
of stuff would, would fall within the end.
But, but you know, I'm also, you know, um, I'm hesitant
to be too prescriptive.
It is useful. It's good.
I mean, like, everyone loves parts,
Rachel, don't worry about it.
There's gonna be public parks as a result of these changes.
We're not like abolishing the idea of public amenity
or public, the public realm.
But, but what is the mechanism for new public parks?
What, what are you, what are you talking about?
Do you think the bill bans public parks or something?
No, I'm saying you are.
If everybody can do whatever they like on their property
and build however tall Yeah.
And councils have got, councils have property too.
And, and are you imagining
that normal development contribution processes would enable
the funding of new reserves?
Or that your new, um, infrastructure funding?
Yeah, we have a whole, we have a whole, well, I mean,
the two, the two things are connected.
I mean, firstly, reserves exist now.
Um, and councils create parks now.
And, um, we're, we're not proposing to stop parks
and, you know, things like that being created.
Um, they, they're not,
they're not always necessarily RMA functions, by the way.
I mean, there's partly a zoning issue,
but, you know, there's a whole reserves act, which,
you know, I'm not an expert on.
But, um, and probably needs an update
'cause it's dates to 1977.
But, um, you know, those, those statutory, uh,
powers exist now in terms of development levies.
We, we are developing legislation around that,
which is out for consultation.
Uh, right now we publish an exposure
draft 'cause it's very complicated.
We want to get it right. Um,
but from memory, the development levy regime
that we are developing, um, which is a companion piece
to this piece of legislation, will allow, um, levies
to be set for the creation of, of public, um, you know,
parks given, we're talking about parks, public parks.
Um, so that will be allowed.
Um, so yeah, so like
people listening can rest easy. We're not getting the,
They might wanna submit on it though.
They might wanna say that actually there should be more
criteria on what, um,
the minister makes national direction about.
Sure, sure. Fair enough.
Yeah. Um, I've got some more questions, but I'll,
Yeah, we'll just, we'll move
On to LA and then we'll loop back, Rachel.
So la
Thank you. Um,
I wanted to go on to regulatory relief. Yes.
Um, minister, we've had some really great
briefings from officials,
but we haven't actually been briefed
on regulatory relief yet.
Oh, okay. Um, so yeah, this, the, this is
where these questions are coming from.
So firstly, just as a baseline, is the intention for any of
the provisions for regulatory relief to
apply like retrospectively?
Uh, it, uh, I think the short answer is it depends on,
um, uh, how the,
how the, uh, how the plan changes
that will flow from this intersect with, um,
the new bills.
Um, so I don't, I don't,
I don't actually know off the top of my head.
Nadine, can you help me out here? I don't.
I've, um, it's been a while since I've looked
at the regulatory release stuff.
Um, you, you are correct, minister.
It is, it does depend on the specific, uh, nature
of the provisions that might already be in place
at the time, and particularly whether the,
the property has gone through some level of purchase,
in which case, uh, there's already an existing sort
of recognition of those protections.
It is an area that the MFE team it
is, can get quite complex.
So having to pick that up through the MFE team in terms
of the more detail behind that.
Yes, because it's, because the, um, uh,
so councils are gonna have to assess their existing controls
for alignment with the goals
and national instruments, which are obviously yet
to be set yet.
Um, and, um, so I mean the, yeah,
I mean, the short answer is it's complicated and it depends,
but I mean, that's something that I think we're gonna wanna
get into in the committee, um,
or you are gonna want get into. Mm-hmm.
And then what about, um, you know,
we've heard it described by some groups
as like a potential chilling effect
where basically there'll be, councils might be worried about
the level of regulatory relief they might be either having
to provide for or challenged on, um,
and that may disincentivize actually putting in rules
or protections in the first place.
What, what's your intention with where that would land?
Well, the whole, the point is to have a chilling effect.
That's a deliberate design choice.
That, that's like partly why we're doing it.
Um, to make, to make councils think about the, uh, decisions
that they make, uh, that have an impact
or significant, uh, impact on the reasonable use of land,
um, you know, on private property to have a,
have a think about what, what that actually means.
I mean, like, that that, I mean, that's,
that's partly why the, the bill exists in,
in its form that it does.
I mean, but people, people like criticizing it saying, oh,
it's gonna make councils think about.
It's like, well, yeah, that's, that's precisely the point,
you know, when councils turn around
and say, you know, well, we've decided
that your property's heritage
and you know, you now can't do the following things to it.
Um, or your property's got a significant natural area on it
and 80% of it's now rendered, you know, incapable
of having things done to it.
Um, you know, the, the point is, at the moment
that is essentially a costless exercise for councils beyond,
beyond the process of, you know, just making the changes,
making the district plan changes
and applying the controls that is costless, it's costless
for them, but it's not costless
to the poor schmuck who owns the land.
Um, and so it's about a better balance
between the public interest and the private interest.
And our, the government's view is
that the balance is wrong at the moment.
Um, and we're not throwing the baby out with the bath water,
but it's a rebalancing, uh, of this.
And, you know, there's, there's gonna be debate about it,
and it can understand why people, why people, um,
you know, it's quite, it's quite confronting for people.
And the reason it's quite confronting is that
we haven't had, we haven't had the system for 30 years.
So it is quite a sea change in the way in which we think
about, uh, property.
But it's, it's just, you know, I just stand strong
behind the idea that, um, there has to be a better way
of recognizing the impact of, uh,
restrictions imposed
by public authorities on private property.
Um, that's, that's what, that's what private, that's what,
that's what can private property in a market economy means.
Yeah. What about when it comes to aspects
like biodiversity where there is documented, for example,
biodiversity decline on private property?
Yeah. You are not, that's the, you're still saying
that is the intention that there would be a chilling effect
on protection of biodiversity? No,
No, I'm not, I'm not saying, I'm not saying that
that's not important, and I'm not saying that,
that there isn't a case for, for that.
Uh, and for restrictions, um, around that, uh, what I,
what I'm, what the, the aim of the bill
or bill's plural, is to better ventilate the trade-offs
as a result of, um, decisions
around state biodiversity protection
or significant natural area or, um, heritage
or s um, slight significance to Maori, for example.
Um, the, the point is, those decisions around that stuff
are important, and they're not,
they're not illegitimate public policy goals.
Don't get me wrong. They are important
and protection of those things is important,
but they, they have, there are trade offs as a result of
that, that at the moment are,
are not visible in the system properly.
And we're trying to essentially make those trade offs
and make those decisions more visible to decision makers
and force people to think about other things other than
those other gu mm-hmm.
Those, those very legitimate goals. Okay.
So, um, yeah, I mean, it's a, it's a subtle, it's, I mean,
it's complicated and it's, it's a subtle, subtle point,
which, you know, I think
So, sorry, obviously, um,
so someone drew my attention minister
to an interview you did
with RNZI think it was just before Christmas.
And the question was basically, say for example,
up in RAF
and Gisborne, if the council was wanting
to put in forestry rules that actually prevented
that excessive catastrophic sediment
and slash actually entering waterways, would they have
to potentially compensate forestry owners?
And you apparently said, yes, I haven't heard it myself,
but is that true?
And is that it, is, is that the intention?
It doesn't sound like something I would say, I mean, the,
the, um, I can't remember doing that interview,
but it doesn't sound like something I would say.
I mean, the, um, the framework set out in the bills
requires a significant impact on the reasonable use of land.
So it's a relatively high bar.
Like it's, um, it's not, I mean, here's the thing, right?
So, you know, on one level, any, any form
of zoning is a restriction.
Okay? So, you know, I live in a residential zone,
it's not an industrial zone does have an impact on my
ability to set up an industrial discharge effluent
discharge in my property.
Yes. Is that a restriction? Yes.
You know, um, but no one thinks that zoning
or like just kind of basic kind of town planning
is a restriction on private property.
Well, it is on one level,
but no one thinks that, that, you know, we should go back
to having the law of taught
and nuisance govern everything in life, you know,
like no one's proposing, um, that, um,
on the other hand, right?
So that's kind of one extreme.
On the other hand, the idea that the council can turn around
and say, you know, you're not allowed
to put a second story on your property
because we've decided that, you know, revisions best known
to ourselves, it was built in the 1950s
and it's heritage protected and blah, blah, blah.
And, or, or in the, well, the better example is the case
of Wellington, like the gas tank out Miramar way,
where the councils decided it's a
heritage protected gas tank.
We've got a protect it. And,
and if you do anything with it, you know, um, you,
you can't, um, you know, that, that, that I,
that I think goes too far.
And, you know, know there, there's any number of examples
around the country in rural areas of,
of SNAs and things like that.
So it is just about getting the dressing the balance a bit
and saying, you know, yep, zoning is important.
Yep. These, these public policy goals are important.
But you know what else is really important?
It's private property,
which is the foundation of a modern economy.
And, you know, we'll have a debate about whether
or not that balance is right.
Um, so anyway, here you go.
Thank, thank you. Look, we're going
to give Grant McCullum, uh,
Yep. I've just got a very
quicks on that same topic.
It just so effectively minister what you're saying here is,
is gonna force councils to sit down with affected landowners
and actually work through and understand the implications
of their decisions, rather as unilaterally imposing them on.
Is that effectively where we're going with this?
Yeah, I mean, yes.
I mean that, that, that will be a,
that will be a really good outcome out of it.
Um, you know, I think some
of you have heard me rant on about
the heart back in the day in 2018,
they spent a th a thousand letters out to
everyone in Eastborne and wa mata
and said, oh, by the way, you know, you didn't know this
before, but we've decided that your property is a SNA on it.
And in some cases, you know,
people found themselves o overnight with 80%
of their property colored in yellow
and told they couldn't, you know, do this
and that and all the rest of it to it.
And you know, that that sort of approach just
winds people up something chronic.
Um, and there'll be a bunch of farmers who've had the same,
same thing of rural New Zealand, same issue.
Whereas if the council had gone away
and said, righto, look, we've done a site by side analysis
and, um, you've got some, um, you know,
native bush on your property, and we wanna sit down
and talk to you about how we protect it
and the common good for everybody,
and, you know, maybe there's some, um, you know, rates
of relief we can do, or there's, um,
a QE two covenants we can do and let's work together
and set up a some, I don't, you know, I mean,
the examples will vary around the place, obviously.
And, and like, here's the thing, this already happens now.
Like this stuff happens kind of
outside the RMA environment framework now.
Um, and, and that's, that's what we wanna encourage.
I mean, we're all, we're all ultimately in this together.
Uh, and you know, I think there's, there's any number of,
and like who knows what communities will come up with.
That's the other thing is like the, the dynamic effects
of, of policy changes.
Sometimes you don't actually know what will come,
what people will, how people will respond or come up with.
And that's the beauty of living, you know, living in a,
in a country like ours, you, you, you're not sure
that life is not certain.
So there'll be any number
of different dynamic policy responses
and different, different communities
and different councils will do different things.
So I, anyway, let's, let's wait and see how it goes.
I mean, I'm aware of some of the
feedback that's coming through about it.
I'm looking forward to the debate and discussion around it,
But we've got time for a couple more questions, Rachel.
Yeah. I'm gonna move away from this.
I could go for a while and go to the treaty.
And, uh, everybody who's looked at this legislation
has said that it goes backwards from
where even the resource management Act in terms
of provisions, um, bull Maori, uh, noting
that there is the new Clause 11 1, 1, um, three
enabling the development, um,
and protection of identified Maori land, which is different.
Uh, but there's clauses about treaty re
and arrangements to be given same or equivalent effect.
And I note the Prime Minister mentioned this in his speech
at Y Tangi on Thursday as well, that there'll be no, um,
regression of treaty settlements
or he used words to that effect.
But I'm wondering how that can be when, uh, the,
this legislation is
so different from the Resource Management Act in terms of
that combination of six E seven A
and eight, uh, plus the, um,
arrangements as well that, that come out here.
How can a statement like that be made?
How can anything be equivalent
as the bills are drafted at the moment?
Well, the equivalency stuff's in relation to settlements.
Um, and I think that's really important
because the settlements are, uh, agreements
that the Crown has entered into in, in good faith, um,
and that, that the law of the land and we need to honor 'em.
There's obviously a, um,
there's obviously a challenge in the sense that, well,
I think ev every settlement was written in the context
of the RMA not one.
And there is a view from some, not a view that I share,
but there is a view from some that
therefore the RMA can never be changed as a result.
Um, that can't be true.
I mean, you and you
and David Parker suffered this, you know, struggled
with the same, same dilemma.
Um, so it can't be true that the RMA can never be changed.
It has to be about to update it for the, for the modern age.
Um, and so there's, you know, protections written into the,
the two bills, um, around, um, you know, equivalency.
Um, and we intend to sit down
and talk with our relevant settled iwi in relation
to giving effect to those settlements.
Um, uh, which, which are, you know,
they have some similarities across all of 'em,
but often they're relatively bespoke, which is,
um, just another challenge.
But, but I'm really confident we can get there.
Um, on the, on the wider issue, I mean, we've, we've tried
to, you know, we have tried to, um,
boil the system down to, you know,
what we think the system should protect
and shouldn't protect and should give effect to.
Um, and, um, you know,
I'm looking forward to feedback around that.
Um, one, yeah, go for it, Rachel.
Different but quick question is, uh, the,
the goal to support and enable economic growth
and change by enabling the use
and development of land, what is the timescale, um, for
that economic growth that is to be enabled?
Do you have a view on that?
No, I mean, it just means what it means.
I mean, like economic growth
through the use and development of land. I mean, like,
Yeah, you think that you can increase GDP
by polluting a river, for instance.
Um, and so is that something that should be enabled,
or do you look at the longer term economic growth
and go, well, then you can't use your resource
because you've used it all up again.
And that's a timescale effect.
And I, I'm just, I'm just thinking about the arguments
that are gonna be made by lawyers
and this is gonna be great, isn't it?
You're depressing me now. You're depressing me now.
You're depressing me now. I mean, like, just,
just go back a step, um, rather than get enmeshed in like
what will end up being debated before the courts.
Um, no doubt, and I'm looking forward to,
I'm not looking forward to seeing how that plays out,
but if you just take a step back, what,
what are we trying to accomplish?
Um, do, do I think a goal
of our planning system should be economic growth,
just at a high level, like yes, I do.
And I think one of the biggest problems
with the RMA is it doesn't mention that.
So you know what the goals, the goals try to crystallize
and articulate what we want the system to do.
So nothing about, we had a, we had a debate, we had a sort
of a policy debate around this, um, in the government,
and it's like, well, do you want a planning system
that facilitates the great problem of New Zealand
public life for the last 30 years, which is a lack
of growth, which is, which is the, the root cause of
so many social problems in New Zealand.
Um, and the, the answer is yes.
So we put economic growth in the goal,
and you can argue against that if you want.
Well, the, the issue is how it, the, the timeframe of it
and how it relates to improvements
or degradation of our environment.
Can't say that word, but
Yeah, I mean, like there are, I mean all these,
I mean all these things are a balance, right?
I mean, like obvious, obviously there's a whole bunch
of stuff you could do that degrades the environment in the,
in the short term, um, that leads to growth.
Um, but it, but actually wealthier economies look
after their environments better.
That's why growth matters.
Like we economies look after their environment.
Poor countries ravaged the environment's,
a direct linkage have the
Causality on that. Correct.
The Soviet Union trashed the environment.
Look, um, we have met time
and I'm sure we're going to traverse many of these issues,
uh, throughout the submission process, which
of course we are all very much looking forward to.
So, uh, we thank you minister for your time today.
Um, of course, I'm sure members if they would like
to find any further information out, uh, you know,
are welcome to as well.
Um, unless there's anything further you would like
to add, uh, minister,
No, I'm looking forward to, I'm, I'm sure we'll be back,
uh, at some point and, um, looking forward to submissions.
Good on, yeah, thanks for your hard work.
No, appreciate your time. Appreciate everyone time.
Thank you. Yeah, yeah. Bye.
And that brings us to a close of the.